README.md, before:

# XJS (eXtensible JavaScript parser)

**XJS** is a highly customizable JavaScript parser. Our goal is to create a JavaScript compiler that includes only the essential, proven features while enabling users to extend the language through dynamic plugins.

## Installation

```bash
go get github.com/xjslang/xjs@latest
```

## Quick Start

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
)

func main() {
	input := `let r = 45; let area = r * r * Math.PI`
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(fmt.Sprintf("ParseProgram() error: %v\n", err))
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let r=45;let area=((r*r)*Math.PI)
}
```

## Minimalism and Sufficiency

Rather than accumulating features over time, **XJS** starts with a carefully curated set of **necessary and sufficient** language constructs. We have deliberately excluded redundant and confusing features:

- **No classes** - Functions provide sufficient abstraction capabilities
- **No arrow functions** - Regular function syntax is adequate
- **No `const/var`** - A single variable declaration mechanism suffices
- **No `try/catch`** - Alternative error handling patterns are preferred
- **No weak equality** - The `==/!=` operators are automatically translated to `===/!==`
- **No redundant syntactic sugar** - Focus on core functionality

This approach ensures that every included feature has demonstrated genuine utility and necessity over the years. However, you can always create a plugin to implement any of the discarded features!

## Extensible Architecture

Everything revolves around the middlewares `UseStatementParser` and `UseExpressionParser`. With these two methods, you can customize the syntax as you wish, adding new features to the language or modifying existing ones.

For convenience, we have also included the methods `RegisterPrefixOperator`, `RegisterInfixOperator`, and `RegisterOperand`, which internally use the middlewares mentioned above.

Additionally, you can concatenate different parsers, further enriching the syntax to suit your preferences. Parsers are executed in LIFO order (Last-In, First-Out).

<details>
	<summary>UseStatementParser example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a `const` node
type ConstStatement struct {
	Token token.Token
	Name  *ast.Identifier
	Value ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (ls *ConstStatement) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("const ")
	ls.Name.WriteTo(b)
	if ls.Value != nil {
		b.WriteRune('=')
		ls.Value.WriteTo(b)
	}
}

func main() {
	input := "const x = 42"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the `const` keyword!
	p.UseStatementParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Statement) ast.Statement {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "const" {
			stmt := &ConstStatement{Token: p.CurrentToken}
			p.NextToken() // moves to identifier token
			stmt.Name = &ast.Identifier{Token: p.CurrentToken, Value: p.CurrentToken.Literal}
			if !p.ExpectToken(token.ASSIGN) { // expects "="
				return nil
			}
			p.NextToken() // moves to value expression
			stmt.Value = p.ParseExpression()
			return stmt
		}
		return next() // otherwise, next!
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: const x=42
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>UseExpressionParser example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a `random()` expression node
type RandomExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (re *RandomExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.random()")
}

func main() {
	input := "let randomValue = RANDOM + 10"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// intercepts expression parsing to handle RANDOM as a special expression!
	p.UseExpressionParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "RANDOM" {
			return p.ParseRemainingExpression(&RandomExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken})
		}
		return next()
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let randomValue=(Math.random()+10)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterPrefixOperator example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a typeof node
type TypeofExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Right ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (te *TypeofExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("(typeof ")
	te.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

func main() {
	input := "if (typeof x == 'string') { console.log('x is a string') }"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the typeof keyword!
	p.RegisterPrefixOperator("typeof", func(right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &TypeofExpression{
			Token: p.CurrentToken,
			Right: right(),
		}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: if ((typeof (x==="string"))){console.log("x is a string")}
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterInfixOperator example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents Math.pow
type PowExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Left  ast.Expression
	Right ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (pe *PowExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.pow(")
	pe.Left.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(',')
	pe.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

func main() {
	input := "let squareArea = r^2"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the ^ operator!
	p.RegisterInfixOperator("^", parser.PRODUCT+1, func(left ast.Expression, right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &PowExpression{
			Token: p.CurrentToken,
			Left:  left,
			Right: right(),
		}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let squareArea=Math.pow(r,2)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterOperand example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents PI
type PiLiteral struct {
	Token token.Token
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (pl *PiLiteral) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.PI")
}

func main() {
	input := "let area = PI * r * r"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the PI constant!
	p.RegisterOperand("PI", func() ast.Expression {
		return &PiLiteral{Token: p.CurrentToken}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let area=((Math.PI*r)*r)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>Concatenate multiple parsers</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

type ConstStatement struct {
	Token token.Token
	Name  *ast.Identifier
	Value ast.Expression
}

func (ls *ConstStatement) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("const ")
	ls.Name.WriteTo(b)
	if ls.Value != nil {
		b.WriteRune('=')
		ls.Value.WriteTo(b)
	}
}

type TypeofExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Right ast.Expression
}

func (te *TypeofExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("(typeof ")
	te.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

type PowExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Left  ast.Expression
	Right ast.Expression
}

func (pe *PowExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.pow(")
	pe.Left.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(',')
	pe.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

type PiLiteral struct {
	Token token.Token
}

func (pl *PiLiteral) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.PI")
}

type RandomExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
}

func (re *RandomExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.random()")
}

func main() {
	input := `
	const circleArea = PI * r^2
	if (typeof radius == 'string') {
		let randomRadius = RANDOM * 10
	}`
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// combines all previous examples!
	p.UseStatementParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Statement) ast.Statement {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "const" {
			stmt := &ConstStatement{Token: p.CurrentToken}
			p.NextToken()
			stmt.Name = &ast.Identifier{Token: p.CurrentToken, Value: p.CurrentToken.Literal}
			if !p.ExpectToken(token.ASSIGN) {
				return nil
			}
			p.NextToken()
			stmt.Value = p.ParseExpression()
			return stmt
		}
		return next()
	})
	p.RegisterPrefixOperator("typeof", func(right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &TypeofExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken, Right: right()}
	})
	p.RegisterInfixOperator("^", parser.PRODUCT+1, func(left ast.Expression, right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &PowExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken, Left: left, Right: right()}
	})
	p.RegisterOperand("PI", func() ast.Expression {
		return &PiLiteral{Token: p.CurrentToken}
	})
	p.UseExpressionParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "RANDOM" {
			return p.ParseRemainingExpression(&RandomExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken})
		}
		return next()
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: const circleArea=(Math.PI*Math.pow(r,2));if ((typeof (radius==="string"))){let randomRadius=(Math.random()*10)}
}
```
</details>

You can also check out [other plugins](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Axjslang+-parser&type=repositories) for inspiration!

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Update README with development status warning

README.md, after:

# XJS (eXtensible JavaScript parser)

> [!WARNING]
> This project is under active development.  
> The API is subject to change without notice.

**XJS** is a highly customizable JavaScript parser. Our goal is to create a JavaScript compiler that includes only the essential, proven features while enabling users to extend the language through dynamic plugins.

## Installation

```bash
go get github.com/xjslang/xjs@latest
```

## Quick Start

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
)

func main() {
	input := `let r = 45; let area = r * r * Math.PI`
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(fmt.Sprintf("ParseProgram() error: %v\n", err))
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let r=45;let area=((r*r)*Math.PI)
}
```

## Minimalism and Sufficiency

Rather than accumulating features over time, **XJS** starts with a carefully curated set of **necessary and sufficient** language constructs. We have deliberately excluded redundant and confusing features:

- **No classes** - Functions provide sufficient abstraction capabilities
- **No arrow functions** - Regular function syntax is adequate
- **No `const/var`** - A single variable declaration mechanism suffices
- **No `try/catch`** - Alternative error handling patterns are preferred
- **No weak equality** - The `==/!=` operators are automatically translated to `===/!==`
- **No redundant syntactic sugar** - Focus on core functionality

This approach ensures that every included feature has demonstrated genuine utility and necessity over the years. However, you can always create a plugin to implement any of the discarded features!

## Extensible Architecture

Everything revolves around the middlewares `UseStatementParser` and `UseExpressionParser`. With these two methods, you can customize the syntax as you wish, adding new features to the language or modifying existing ones.

For convenience, we have also included the methods `RegisterPrefixOperator`, `RegisterInfixOperator`, and `RegisterOperand`, which internally use the middlewares mentioned above.

Additionally, you can concatenate different parsers, further enriching the syntax to suit your preferences. Parsers are executed in LIFO order (Last-In, First-Out).

<details>
	<summary>UseStatementParser example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a `const` node
type ConstStatement struct {
	Token token.Token
	Name  *ast.Identifier
	Value ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (ls *ConstStatement) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("const ")
	ls.Name.WriteTo(b)
	if ls.Value != nil {
		b.WriteRune('=')
		ls.Value.WriteTo(b)
	}
}

func main() {
	input := "const x = 42"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the `const` keyword!
	p.UseStatementParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Statement) ast.Statement {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "const" {
			stmt := &ConstStatement{Token: p.CurrentToken}
			p.NextToken() // moves to identifier token
			stmt.Name = &ast.Identifier{Token: p.CurrentToken, Value: p.CurrentToken.Literal}
			if !p.ExpectToken(token.ASSIGN) { // expects "="
				return nil
			}
			p.NextToken() // moves to value expression
			stmt.Value = p.ParseExpression()
			return stmt
		}
		return next() // otherwise, next!
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: const x=42
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>UseExpressionParser example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a `random()` expression node
type RandomExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (re *RandomExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.random()")
}

func main() {
	input := "let randomValue = RANDOM + 10"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// intercepts expression parsing to handle RANDOM as a special expression!
	p.UseExpressionParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "RANDOM" {
			return p.ParseRemainingExpression(&RandomExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken})
		}
		return next()
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let randomValue=(Math.random()+10)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterPrefixOperator example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents a typeof node
type TypeofExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Right ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (te *TypeofExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("(typeof ")
	te.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

func main() {
	input := "if (typeof x == 'string') { console.log('x is a string') }"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the typeof keyword!
	p.RegisterPrefixOperator("typeof", func(right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &TypeofExpression{
			Token: p.CurrentToken,
			Right: right(),
		}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: if ((typeof (x==="string"))){console.log("x is a string")}
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterInfixOperator example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents Math.pow
type PowExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Left  ast.Expression
	Right ast.Expression
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (pe *PowExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.pow(")
	pe.Left.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(',')
	pe.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

func main() {
	input := "let squareArea = r^2"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the ^ operator!
	p.RegisterInfixOperator("^", parser.PRODUCT+1, func(left ast.Expression, right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &PowExpression{
			Token: p.CurrentToken,
			Left:  left,
			Right: right(),
		}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let squareArea=Math.pow(r,2)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>RegisterOperand example</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

// Represents PI
type PiLiteral struct {
	Token token.Token
}

// Tells the parser how to write a node
func (pl *PiLiteral) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.PI")
}

func main() {
	input := "let area = PI * r * r"
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// adds support for the PI constant!
	p.RegisterOperand("PI", func() ast.Expression {
		return &PiLiteral{Token: p.CurrentToken}
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: let area=((Math.PI*r)*r)
}
```
</details>

<details>
	<summary>Concatenate multiple parsers</summary>

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"strings"

	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/ast"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/lexer"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/parser"
	"github.com/xjslang/xjs/token"
)

type ConstStatement struct {
	Token token.Token
	Name  *ast.Identifier
	Value ast.Expression
}

func (ls *ConstStatement) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("const ")
	ls.Name.WriteTo(b)
	if ls.Value != nil {
		b.WriteRune('=')
		ls.Value.WriteTo(b)
	}
}

type TypeofExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Right ast.Expression
}

func (te *TypeofExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("(typeof ")
	te.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

type PowExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
	Left  ast.Expression
	Right ast.Expression
}

func (pe *PowExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.pow(")
	pe.Left.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(',')
	pe.Right.WriteTo(b)
	b.WriteRune(')')
}

type PiLiteral struct {
	Token token.Token
}

func (pl *PiLiteral) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.PI")
}

type RandomExpression struct {
	Token token.Token
}

func (re *RandomExpression) WriteTo(b *strings.Builder) {
	b.WriteString("Math.random()")
}

func main() {
	input := `
	const circleArea = PI * r^2
	if (typeof radius == 'string') {
		let randomRadius = RANDOM * 10
	}`
	l := lexer.New(input)
	p := parser.New(l)
	// combines all previous examples!
	p.UseStatementParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Statement) ast.Statement {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "const" {
			stmt := &ConstStatement{Token: p.CurrentToken}
			p.NextToken()
			stmt.Name = &ast.Identifier{Token: p.CurrentToken, Value: p.CurrentToken.Literal}
			if !p.ExpectToken(token.ASSIGN) {
				return nil
			}
			p.NextToken()
			stmt.Value = p.ParseExpression()
			return stmt
		}
		return next()
	})
	p.RegisterPrefixOperator("typeof", func(right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &TypeofExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken, Right: right()}
	})
	p.RegisterInfixOperator("^", parser.PRODUCT+1, func(left ast.Expression, right func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		return &PowExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken, Left: left, Right: right()}
	})
	p.RegisterOperand("PI", func() ast.Expression {
		return &PiLiteral{Token: p.CurrentToken}
	})
	p.UseExpressionParser(func(p *parser.Parser, next func() ast.Expression) ast.Expression {
		if p.CurrentToken.Type == token.IDENT && p.CurrentToken.Literal == "RANDOM" {
			return p.ParseRemainingExpression(&RandomExpression{Token: p.CurrentToken})
		}
		return next()
	})
	ast, err := p.ParseProgram()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Println(ast.String())
	// Output: const circleArea=(Math.PI*Math.pow(r,2));if ((typeof (radius==="string"))){let randomRadius=(Math.random()*10)}
}
```
</details>

You can also check out [other plugins](https://github.com/search?q=org%3Axjslang+-parser&type=repositories) for inspiration!

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
